In our lab, we have a history of leveraging Bayes' Rule to come up with new methods for computational protein design (distributional design more generally) (#TODO[pi] add footnotes for CBaS and ProteinGuide).  This simple, statistically principled approach only invokes the definition of conditional probability to work its magic. 

#TODO[pi] add a quick line of latex with Bayes' Rule

Bayes' rule is normally thought of as "updating" a prior distribution to better model "new" information. This may be the case, for example, when we use Bayes' rule to get better and better estimates of the bias of a bent coin. The bent coin ... #TODO[pi] do this example first.

However, we don't always you Bayes' rule this way. In any kind of generative model "guidance" such as classifier guidance (of which ProteinGuide is classifier guidance for discrete state spaces), we actually fix theta and actually change the distribution over generated images, protein sequences, etc. given an observed property of the generated object. One subtle point here is that the model doesn't change!

#TODO[pi] I think I need to maintain a running example here
Classifier guidance answers the question: if I ran my unconditional model enough times to see the desired outcome, what would I see. This is in contrast to the bent coin, where we were asking: what bias of the coin would best model our data. In other words, we imagine the set of all possible samples of size $n$ that we could get from the unconditional model. We score them all in terms of $y$, and classifier guidance gives us the conditional distribution of $x$ given $y$. 

Add a vector drawing of a generative model creating sets, getting the score and filtering out the ones that don't satisfy y.

Note this is different from veritably updating my distribution p(x) to get a model of p_data(x|y). That would be a model of, if I samples from the data enough times to see the desired outcome, what sequence would I see. Given that we know our generative model will be just an approximation of the true feasible space of proteins, we know upfront that these two may be quite different. In this post, I won't get into the pros and cons of this and how to deal with it practically.

In contrast to guidance methods, which don't update the model parameters, there are also finetuning methods which do.  Often these may do some kind of gradient descent or MCMC to maximize or sample from, respectively, p(x|y). 

At BAIR #TODO[pi] add link, we are very close to several labs at the frontier of reinforcement learning. In that field, a classic result is that if you want to maximize an expect reward, which staying close to an original reference model, the optimal solution looks something like
exponentiated rewards
Now this looks almost like bayes' rule right?
My favorite mathematical technique, that I learned early on from rusczyk's videos was "wishing". Just supposed the math boils down to what you want and then figure out how you would've gotten there. Let's wish that exponentiated reward is Bayes' rule.
set logp(y|x) to exponentiated reward and rewrite bayes rule (exponentiated in light gray)
Now this is a bit unnatural right. If we had to interpret this probabilistically, we would imagine that y is the event that I chose an x according to a set where the unconditional model just *happened* to generate sequences according to our desired exponential reweighting (which you could think of as imposing a boltzmann distribution with respect to the reward). Another way to think of this is that if we have any finetuned model, it implicitly defines a reward distribution relative to the original model. This is exactly the insight leveraged by DPO.

DPO is a variant of finetuning which has recently garnered some interest in protein design (#TODO[pi] cite proteinDPO). Let's see if it admits a more intuitive probabilistic interpretation than fully unconstrained exponentiated rewards.
Nope DPO is the same, just lets you estimate that gibbs distribution from pairwise comparison data instead of human preferences on the entire set of options.

So what is strange about "simulate the distribution of sequences generated by random samples of your old self and the gibbs distribution that happen to agree". P(x) outputs a sequence p(y|x) is the probability that the gibbs sample is x too.

Bayes' rule is defining a generative model. Reweight the samples according to the probability that the gibbs distribution agrees. Can also think of this as a filter where you get a gibbs sample and if they are the same, it passes through.

Maybe discuss connection to hedge. This is the softmax over the sum of observed rewards.